doc: move package config docs to separate page (#34748)
nodejs/node: doc/api/packages.md

# Modules: Packages

<!-- type=misc -->

## Introduction

A package is a folder described by a `package.json` file.

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another `package.json` file, are a _package

> scope_.

Reviewer: The package scope concept isn’t mentioned elsewhere on this page. Should we move the “Package scope and file extensions” section, and possibly other parts of the ESM enabling section, here? All the content about package scope and `"type"` applies equally to CommonJS as ESM.

Reviewer 2: There's a section for terms, right?

```html
<dt>Package scope</dt>
<dd>

folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another `package.json`

</dd>
```

Reviewer 2: Looks like we still have everything over at the following URL.

https://github.com/nodejs/modules/blob/master/doc/terminology.md

Should we add this definition to there?

Reviewer: > Should we add this definition to there?

That document was written to help guide the modules group in coming up with the new implementation. It isn't part of the Node docs.

The docs need to explain package scope in order to explain `"type"`. So it needs to be in the docs. I'm thinking that the whole Enabling section needs to move to the Packages page, and the intro sentences rewritten from the perspective of “how to enable ESM” to instead be “how a package tells Node whether it’s CommonJS or ESM.” And then the ESM page still needs an Enabling section, something like:

> ## Enabling
>
> Node.js treats JavaScript code as CommonJS modules by default. Authors can tell Node.js to treat JavaScript code as ECMAScript modules via the `.mjs` file extension, the `package.json` `"type"` field, or the `--input-type=module` flag. See [Determining Module System]().

Where the link at the end links to what was the Enabling section, now living on the Packages page. And the above brief paragraph is all we need as a new Enabling section in the ESM page.

Author: Done in 7043be8a2172b4d16ee2b348d51c7197087f1dec, PTAL

# Modules: Packages

<!-- type=misc -->

## Introduction

A package is a folder described by a `package.json` file.

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another `package.json` file, are a _package
scope_.

> 

Reviewer 3: I believe this sort of outline will be obvious from the generated table of contents since the fields are each their own section.

I'm not sure we should be listing fields that are not defined by Node.js. We do specifically link to the npm package.json definition page though in the package.json fields introduction.

> 

Reviewer 3: I've moved this to the beginning of the reference section itself in the feedback PR.

`"type": "commonjs"`, `.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][]. If the volume
root is reached and no `package.json` is found, Node.js defers to the default, a
`package.json` with no `"type"` field.

`import` statements of `.js` files are treated as ES modules if the nearest
parent `package.json` contains `"type": "module"`.

```js
// my-app.js, part of the same example as above
import './startup.js'; // Loaded as ES module because of package.json
```

Package authors should include the `"type"` field, even in packages where all
sources are [CommonJS][]. Being explicit about the `type` of the package will
future-proof the package in case the default type of Node.js ever changes, and
it will also make things easier for build tools and loaders to determine how the
files in the package should be interpreted.

Regardless of the value of the `"type"` field, `.mjs` files are always treated
as ES modules and `.cjs` files are always treated as [CommonJS][].

### Package scope and file extensions

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another `package.json`, are a

> _package scope_. Package scopes do not carry through `node_modules` folders. The

Author: > If module.js does `import 'foo/file.js'` is it loaded as cjs or mjs?

That'd be loaded as CJS.
However, `import './node_modules/foo/file.js'` would be loaded as ESM.

    "node": {
      "import": "./feature-node.mjs",
      "require": "./feature-node.cjs"
    },
    "default": "./feature.mjs",
  }
}
```

Conditions continue to be matched in order as with flat conditions. If
a nested conditional does not have any mapping it will continue checking
the remaining conditions of the parent condition. In this way nested
conditions behave analogously to nested JavaScript `if` statements.

### Resolving user conditions

When running Node.js, custom user conditions can be added with the
`--conditions` flag:

```bash
node --conditions=development main.js
```

which would then resolve the `"development"` condition in package imports and
exports, while resolving the existing `"node"`, `"default"`, `"import"`, and
`"require"` conditions as appropriate.

Any number of custom conditions can be set with repeat flags.

### Self-referencing a package using its name

Within a package, the values defined in the package’s
`package.json` `"exports"` field can be referenced via the package’s name.
For example, assuming the `package.json` is:

```json
// package.json
{
  "name": "a-package",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./main.mjs",
    "./foo": "./foo.js"
  }
}
```

> Then any module _in that package_ can reference an export in the package itself:

Reviewer 3: Yes exactly, this name mechanism overrides the existing node_modules lookup using the package boundary as the source of truth.

  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./index.cjs",
    "./module": "./wrapper.mjs"
  }
}
```

#### Approach #2: Isolate state

A `package.json` file can define the separate CommonJS and ES module entry
points directly:

```json
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{
  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    "import": "./index.mjs",
    "require": "./index.cjs"
  }
}
```

This can be done if both the CommonJS and ES module versions of the package are
equivalent, for example because one is the transpiled output of the other; and
the package’s management of state is carefully isolated (or the package is
stateless).

The reason that state is an issue is because both the CommonJS and ES module
versions of the package may get used within an application; for example, the
user’s application code could `import` the ES module version while a dependency
`require`s the CommonJS version. If that were to occur, two copies of the
package would be loaded in memory and therefore two separate states would be
present. This would likely cause hard-to-troubleshoot bugs.

Aside from writing a stateless package (if JavaScript’s `Math` were a package,

> for example, it would be stateless as all of its methods are static), there are

Reviewer 3: We're referring to internal state specifically here, which is a separate point to the concept of being able to override an interface in JS.

# Modules: Packages

<!-- type=misc -->

## Introduction

A package is a folder described by a `package.json` file.

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another `package.json` file, are a _package
scope_.

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we add another sort of summary here as to what fields are defined here, and a pointer to npm definitions, maybe something like:

```
Node.js uses the following fields in the package.json:

* [`"type"`](#link)
* [`"main"`](#link)
* [`"exports"`](#link)
* [`"imports"`](#link)

Other projects define and use their own fields, such as those used by [npm for defining dependencies](https://docs.npmjs.com/files/package.json).
```

Author: I'd very much prefer to do that in a following PR if that's OK: I promise you that's something I want to do (it's been several months I have started pushing for it 😅), I'm worried nothing will get done if I try to do it in one PR.

Reviewer 3: Ok great, let's do it next of course.

`"type": "commonjs"`, `.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][]. If the volume
root is reached and no `package.json` is found, Node.js defers to the default, a
`package.json` with no `"type"` field.

`import` statements of `.js` files are treated as ES modules if the nearest
parent `package.json` contains `"type": "module"`.

```js
// my-app.js, part of the same example as above
import './startup.js'; // Loaded as ES module because of package.json
```

Package authors should include the `"type"` field, even in packages where all
sources are [CommonJS][]. Being explicit about the `type` of the package will
future-proof the package in case the default type of Node.js ever changes, and
it will also make things easier for build tools and loaders to determine how the
files in the package should be interpreted.

Regardless of the value of the `"type"` field, `.mjs` files are always treated
as ES modules and `.cjs` files are always treated as [CommonJS][].

### Package scope and file extensions

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another `package.json`, are a

> _package scope_. The `"type"` field defines how to treat `.js` files
> within the package scope. Every package in a
> project’s `node_modules` folder contains its own `package.json` file, so each
> project’s dependencies have their own package scopes. If a `package.json` file
> does not have a `"type"` field, the default `"type"` is `"commonjs"`.

Reviewer 3: Two issues here: (1) it's not strictly correct that everything in node_modules necessarily has a package.json, (2) the type boundary does stop on node_modules which is important information too here.

Suggested rewording:

```suggestion
_package scope_. Package scopes do not carry through `node_modules` folders. The
`"type"` the module format of `.js` files within the package scope. If a
`package.json` file does not have a `"type"` field, the default is `"commonjs"`.
```

possible. Providing a `"default"` condition ensures that any unknown JS
environments are able to use this universal implementation, which helps avoid
these JS environments from having to pretend to be existing environments in
order to support packages with conditional exports. For this reason, using
`"node"` and `"default"` condition branches is usually preferable to using
`"node"` and `"browser"` condition branches.

### Nested conditions

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

In addition to direct mappings, Node.js also supports nested condition objects.

For example, to define a package that only has dual mode entry points for
use in Node.js but not the browser:

```json
{
  "main": "./main.js",
  "exports": {
    "node": {
      "import": "./feature-node.mjs",
      "require": "./feature-node.cjs"
    },
    "default": "./feature.mjs",
  }
}
```

Conditions continue to be matched in order as with flat conditions. If
a nested conditional does not have any mapping it will continue checking
the remaining conditions of the parent condition. In this way nested
conditions behave analogously to nested JavaScript `if` statements.

### Resolving user conditions

> When running Node.js, custom user conditions can be added with the
> `--conditions` or `-u` flag:

Reviewer 3: This was just reverted on master, so would be good to get this change in:

```suggestion
When running Node.js, custom user conditions can be added with the
`--conditions` flag:
```

* The package is stateless or its state can be isolated without too much
  difficulty.
* The package is unlikely to have other public packages that depend on it, or if
  it does, the package is stateless or has state that need not be shared between
  dependencies or with the overall application.

Even with isolated state, there is still the cost of possible extra code
execution between the CommonJS and ES module versions of a package.

As with the previous approach, a variant of this approach not requiring
conditional exports for consumers could be to add an export, e.g.
`"./module"`, to point to an all-ES module-syntax version of the package:

```json
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{
  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./index.cjs",
    "./module": "./index.mjs"
  }
}
```

[Conditional exports]: #packages_conditional_exports
[Babel]: https://babeljs.io/
[`esm`]: https://github.com/standard-things/esm#readme
[the full specifier path]: modules_esm.html#modules_esm_mandatory_file_extensions
[the dual CommonJS/ES module packages section]: #packages_dual_commonjs_es_module_packages
[ES modules]: esm.html

> [CommonJS]: modules.html

Reviewer: Can you please double-check that the content now in `packages.md` is up-to-date with the latest changes on `master` for `esm.md`? It seems like it is, since I see `--conditions`, but we should verify before we merge this in.

And anyone else on this thread, we should hold other PRs that change `esm.md` until this one lands.

Author: > Can you please double-check that the content now in packages.md is up-to-date with the latest changes on master for esm.md

I'm quite confident I have included all the recent changes: everytime a section on master changes, it creates a conflict on rebase so it's not too difficult to spot where changes have been made.
